Add Support for Iceberg table sort orders (#21977)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/iceberg.rst

            20 | canada        |         2 | comment
            30 | mexico        |         3 | comment
    (3 rows)

Sorted Tables

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> The connector supports to create sorted files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Iceberg connector supports the creation of sorted tables.
```

Data in the Iceberg table is sorted during the writing process within each file.

Sorted Iceberg tables can provide a huge increase in performance in query times.
Sorting is particularly beneficial when the sorted columns show a
high cardinality and are used as a filter for selective reads.

> The sort order is configured with the ``sorted_by`` table property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure sort order with the ``sorted_by`` table property to specify an array of one or more columns to use for sorting.
```
You may want to break this suggestion into two lines for line length considerations, but this was the easiest way to show my suggested text change. Let me know if this rephrasing suggestion is incorrect, please!

> When creating the table, can specify an array of one or more columns to use for sorting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The following example creates the table with sorted_by property and sorts file based on field ``join_date``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example creates the table with the ``sorted_by`` property, and sorts the file based on the field ``join_date``.
```

> 

Reviewer: A local build shows the first code example is not correctly formatted. Compare the first code block with the second correctly generated code block in the screenshot. 

Would you please reformat the first code block so that it displays in your local build like the second code block? Thanks! 
<img width="964" alt="Screenshot 2024-02-21 at 10 26 24 AM" src="https://github.com/prestodb/presto/assets/7013443/f40bb441-8b06-443b-8295-ab3bf6c8c88c">

Author: @steveburnett, I have made the suggested changes.

Reviewer: Thanks @evanvdia! I see that you did make changes, including in the first code block here, but a local build of the docs still renders the first code block as though it has formatting problems. Did you not experience this formatting problem when you did a local build of the docs after the change? 
Screenshot from a new pull of the branch and a new build of the docs here just now. 
<img width="962" alt="Screenshot 2024-02-22 at 9 51 52 AM" src="https://github.com/prestodb/presto/assets/7013443/2e38fe22-1a03-4117-8890-bee0d8f60190">

Reviewer: Thanks for the formatting change! The first code block looks better now in a local build after your changes.

            20 | canada        |         2 | comment
            30 | mexico        |         3 | comment
    (3 rows)

Sorted Tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The Iceberg connector supports to creation of sorted files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Iceberg connector supports the creation of sorted files.
```
I had suggested "The Iceberg connector supports the creation of sorted tables." yesterday. Should this sentence end in "files" or "tables"?

Author: Done

    (3 rows)

Sorted Tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Iceberg connector supports the creation of sorted tables.
Data in the Iceberg table is sorted during the writing process within each file.

Sorted Iceberg tables can provide a huge increase in performance in query times.
Sorting is particularly beneficial when the sorted columns show a
high cardinality and are used as a filter for selective reads.

Configure sort order with the ``sorted_by`` table property to specify an array of
one or more columns to use for sorting.
The following example creates the table with the ``sorted_by`` property, and sorts the file based
on the field ``join_date``.

.. code-block:: text

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date']
    )

Sorting can be combined with partitioning on the same column. For example::

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        partitioning = ARRAY['month(join_date)'],
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date']

>     )

Reviewer 2: +1 
1. It would be good to have CREATE examples with sort direction and Null Ordering as well.
2. Also adding details around what default sort order and null ordering would be taken when Table is created from Presto.

>     )

Author: @hantangwangd  @agrawalreetika  updated

    - ``TIMESTAMP WITH ZONE``

No other types are supported.

Sorted Tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Iceberg connector supports the creation of sorted tables.

> Data in the Iceberg table is sorted during the writing process within each file.

Author: done

Sorted Iceberg tables can provide a huge increase in performance in query times.

> Sorting is particularly beneficial when the sorted columns show a

Author: done

high cardinality and are used as a filter for selective reads.

Configure sort order with the ``sorted_by`` table property to specify an array of
one or more columns to use for sorting.
The following example creates the table with the ``sorted_by`` property, and sorts the file based
on the field ``join_date``.

.. code-block:: text

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date']
    )

Sorting can be combined with partitioning on the same column. For example::

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        partitioning = ARRAY['month(join_date)'],
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date']
    )

> To disable the sorted writing, set the session property

Author: done

Sorted Tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Iceberg connector supports the creation of sorted tables.
Data in the Iceberg table is sorted as each file is written.

Sorted Iceberg tables can decrease query times in many cases; however, it will depend on the query shape and cluster configuration.
Sorting is particularly beneficial when the sorted columns have a
high cardinality and are used as a filter for selective reads.

Configure sort order with the ``sorted_by`` table property to specify an array of
one or more columns to use for sorting.
The following example creates the table with the ``sorted_by`` property, and sorts the file based
on the field ``join_date``. The default sort direction is ASC, with null values ordered as NULLS FIRST.

.. code-block:: text

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date']
    )

You can explicitly configure sort directions or null ordering in the following way::

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (

>         sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date DESC NULLS FIRST', emp_id ASC NULLS LAST]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date DESC NULLS FIRST', 'emp_id ASC NULLS LAST']
```

Reviewer 3: Also, consider adding a sentence that presto does not support sort order transforms currently.

Author: @ZacBlanco Done

No other types are supported.

Sorted Tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Iceberg connector supports the creation of sorted tables.
Data in the Iceberg table is sorted as each file is written.

> Sorted Iceberg tables can provide a huge increase in performance in query times.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sorted Iceberg tables can decrease query times in many cases; however, it will depend on the query shape and cluster configuration.
```

Let's not try to make bold claims. I would recommend leaving out the adjective "huge" and try to more objectively describe the feature. Especially when making performance claims, there are many factors which can increase (or decrease) performance. Users will get upset if sorted tables don't _always_ improve performance :)

Author: @ZacBlanco It also supports sorting data in Parquet files.

 Data sorted in PARQUET file format
<img width="896" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1e391c05-dad9-4e5f-bf00-5038e646299c" />

Data sorted in ORC file format
<img width="1004" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9723215d-29f3-4b5a-81fb-d3fcb40f9b1a" />

If we set `sorted_writing_enabled` as false and table specifies a sort_by property, it will not throw any error but data in the files are unsorted.

Added test cases for scenarios where sorted writing is disabled, but the table specifies a sort order.

Reviewer 3: > If we set sorted_writing_enabled as false and table specifies a sort_by property, it will not throw any error but data in the files are unsorted.

Is there a reason that this should even be a configuration property and a table property? I don't think it really makes sense to have both. In the case where the configuration is disabled but it is set on the table property, we will potentially get incorrect results for later queries who expect the data in each file to be sorted.

Sorting is particularly beneficial when the sorted columns have a

> high cardinality and are used as a filter for selective reads.

Reviewer 3: I like that this sentence very clearly states the cases where sorting is beneficial :+1:

No other types are supported.

> Sorted Tables

Reviewer 4: Please add some documentation on unsupported sort orders and the behavior around that.

Author: Done

Configure sort order with the ``sorted_by`` table property to specify an array of
one or more columns to use for sorting.
The following example creates the table with the ``sorted_by`` property, and sorts the file based
on the field ``join_date``. The default sort direction is ASC, with null values ordered as NULLS FIRST.

.. code-block:: text

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date']
    )

You can explicitly configure sort directions or null ordering in the following way::

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date DESC NULLS FIRST', 'emp_id ASC NULLS LAST']
    )

Sorting can be combined with partitioning on the same column. For example::

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        partitioning = ARRAY['month(join_date)'],
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date']
    )

> Iceberg Connector does not support sort order transforms.The following sort order transformations are not supported:

Reviewer 4: A warning is added when these are used, right?  Can you add that information to this documentation?

Author: @tdcmeehan Done

No other types are supported.

Sorted Tables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Iceberg connector supports the creation of sorted tables.
Data in the Iceberg table is sorted as each file is written.

> Sorted Iceberg tables can decrease query times in many cases; however, it will depend on the query shape and cluster configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sorted Iceberg tables can decrease z in many cases; but query times can also depend on the query shape and cluster configuration.
```

Author: Done

Reviewer: I apologize for the typo in my feedback. I'm glad you noticed it and corrected it here!

Sorting is particularly beneficial when the sorted columns have a
high cardinality and are used as a filter for selective reads.

Configure sort order with the ``sorted_by`` table property to specify an array of
one or more columns to use for sorting.
The following example creates the table with the ``sorted_by`` property, and sorts the file based
on the field ``join_date``. The default sort direction is ASC, with null values ordered as NULLS FIRST.

.. code-block:: text

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date']
    )

> You can explicitly configure sort directions or null ordering in the following way::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Explicitly configure sort directions or null ordering using the following example::
```

Author: Done

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date DESC NULLS FIRST', 'emp_id ASC NULLS LAST']
    )

Sorting can be combined with partitioning on the same column. For example::

    CREATE TABLE emp.employees.employee (
        emp_id BIGINT,
        emp_name VARCHAR,
        join_date DATE,
        country VARCHAR)
    WITH (
        partitioning = ARRAY['month(join_date)'],
        sorted_by = ARRAY['join_date']
    )

> Iceberg Connector does not support sort order transforms. The following sort order transformations are not supported:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Iceberg connector does not support sort order transforms. The following sort order transformations are not supported:
```
